NARRATOR:
Tonight on Beyond Oak Island...
MARTY:
We're looking for
treasure that was
hidden away by the pirate
Captain Aury.
They supposedly
had buried 11 caches
of different treasures
around this Spanish Well.
-MATTY: Really?
-I think there's
something there.
MARTY:
Let's find the treasure.
GATUSSO:
So I'm just gonna comb
this whole thing.
Ooh, right here.
-MATTY: Ooh, I like that.
-GATUSSO: Let's go dig.
MARTY:
Doing great, Matty.
-MATTY: What is that?
-GATUSSO: Gold.
That's gold?
♪ ♪
All the while
we were growing up,
my brother and I were fascinated
with finding treasure.
RICK:
Pirate treasure,
cursed treasure.
Civil War gold.
-(laughter)
-Since then,
our work on Oak Island
has shown us
there's a world of mysteries...
-Whoa.
-...waiting to be explored.
RICK:
So, we like to reach out
to other treasure hunters.
X marks the spot, right there.
Brilliant.
-MARTY: We want to hear
their stories...
-That's right.
-...and share our insights.
-"Ill-gotten gains."
-RICK: And who knows...
-GARY: I got it.
...maybe we can help them
with their search.
MARTY:
Not only in America.
Wow. That is gold.
-RICK: But all over the world.
-Yeah!
MARTY:
Beyond Oak Island.
♪ ♪
MATTY: Well, Marty, uh,
thank you for inviting me
for another Florida
treasure hunt.
-I am pumped.
-Come on, Matty, you're magic.
-(laughing)
-Look at the day, buddy.
Look at the day.
I do have a little bit
of a hot streak going
with finding items.
-All right.
-So hopefully I'll bring
some luck of the Irish
on this one.
NARRATOR:
In Tampa, Florida,
Marty Lagina and Matty Blake
are on their way
to the home of Joe Zsiga,
a retired boat captain
who recently made local news
headlines regarding his pursuit
of buried treasure connected
to the early 19th century
French privateer Louis Aury.
Yeah, well, this one
is gonna be cool.
I got, you know,
I always have high hopes,
-I always have high hopes.
-Yeah.
But I've talked
to this Captain Joe,
and he had done
all this research
and classic, you know,
hours and hours and hours.
Passionate,
let's call it obsessed.
-(chuckles)
-Mm-hmm.
MARTY:
He's looking for treasure
that was hidden away
by the pirate Captain Aury.
He's just about to dig
and the authorities say,
"No, no, you can't dig
without an archaeologist."
So, you remember Dr. Taylor?
-Of course.
-Yeah.
Great archaeologist,
and so Rick and I said,
-"Well, we can help out."
-Love it.
So Dr. Taylor will be here.
And that supplied
the piece that's gonna
allow us to dig up,
-hopefully, this treasure.
-Wow.
MARTY:
Matty, I think this is it,
right here.
-MATTY: Oh, nice.
-This is Captain Joe's house.
All right. Oh.
-I think I see our crew.
-Yeah, there's our crew.
-Gentlemen.
-Hey, good morning.
-Hey, how are you?
-We're good.
-All right, I'm Marty.
-Nice to meet you, Marty.
I'm Joe, Captain Joe.
-Captain Joe, how are you?
-Good.
NARRATOR:
Originally from Ohio,
Joe Zsiga worked
for more than 30 years
as a successful
air conditioning contractor
in Tampa, Florida
before retiring in 2021.
For the last several years,
he has enjoyed secondary
careers as a boat captain
and now, a fulltime
treasure hunter.
JOE:
I grew up in a small town
near Cleveland, Ohio.
I was always adventurous
when I was growing up as a kid,
and exploring was
in my nature and blood.
Treasure hunting
started as a hobby.
When I discovered Louis Aury
and that he actually was here
in the bay area,
that changed everything.
And that was the moment
that turned me from
part-time treasure hunter
to full-time treasure hunter.
NARRATOR:
Also joining the meeting today
are Joe's friend and research
partner Mike Gattuso,
as well as Nova Scotia based
archaeologist Dr. Aaron Taylor.
Captain, before
we hear the specifics
of what we're doing
and what you have in mind
for this particular search,
like, I'm just curious,
why this hunt?
Like, what about
this particular character
and this hunt
was alluring to you?
Why this one?
JOE:
Well, here's the thing:
-I'm a history nut.
-MARTY: Okay.
-Now we're getting to it.
-JOE: And the history part of it
intrigues me to the point
where, you know,
I'll be that guy
at 2:00 a.m. in the morning
just searching any documents
that I can come across
from the Library of Congress
or wherever.
-MARTY: Hmm.
-And that's how
my journey started.
This led me
to Louis-Michel Aury.
NARRATOR:
Born in Paris, France in 1788,
Louis Aury joined
the French Navy,
serving on privateer ships
beginning when he was
just 14 years old.
A natural sailor and leader,
within eight years,
Aury became the master
of his own fleet of ships.
However, he was also moved
by the plight
of the indigenous people
in Central America
who had been colonized
by the Spanish,
and took part
in numerous revolutions,
even forging an alliance
with Venezuelan
revolutionary Simón Bolívar.
MOSS:
In the early 1800s,
you started to see
some of the Spanish republics
in the New World,
in the Americas,
start to rebel back
against Spain,
and fight back
for their own independence.
And Aury himself got swept up
in this rebellion.
And would oftentimes,
even though he was French,
and maybe because he was French,
um, he would fight
against the Spanish,
um, in order to liberate
areas like Mexico,
Guatemala, Panama.
It just made him a really
fascinating character.
NARRATOR:
By 1815,
Aury returned to privateering,
plundering Spanish ships
from his base on Amelia Island
off the west coast of Florida.
MOSS:
He made a tremendous
amount of money.
Estimates have it
being over $500,000
of 1818 money,
which is the equivalent
of five billion dollars today.
Five billion dollars, with a B.
What he did with that money,
we're not quite sure.
NARRATOR:
In 1817,
as the United States
led a campaign
to eliminate privateering
off the Florida coast,
Louis Aury
is believed to have buried
much of his plundered treasure
in numerous caches
at different locations.
In 1821, he suffered
an untimely death
after being thrown
from his horse,
leaving the fate
of the immense wealth
he is reported
to have accumulated unknown.
However, Joe Zsiga
and Michael Gattuso
believe they have found
where Aury hid several
of the treasure deposits
with the help of indigenous
allies near Anclote, Florida.
Well, I'm curious,
Captain, like,
what happened that set you
on this particular search.
Did you find something?
And-and where were you?
Well, it started with
Michael finding
the record that we needed.
-Hmm.
-Okay.
A few months ago, I had done
some extensive research
at the University
of South Florida,
so I wanted to see if possibly
this treasure might have been
in one of these archives.
So, as I'm looking,
I find this little snippet,
like an article of historians
that had done research
on different treasures.
And I see that it says,
"Captain Louis Curry,"
but it had question marks.
So anybody that's not really...
who's looking to treasure hunt
and look at that,
wouldn't even realize
that's not even the right
spelling of the name.
-MARTY: Mm-hmm.
-Just from the fact
that he had told me,
the last name being Aury,
it clicked.
It's actually
Captain Louis Aury,
they just misunderstood
the last name.
Okay, makes sense.
Because one thing I've learned
on this journey--
when you talk about symbology--
one of the techniques that
these depositors will leave
is slight misspellings
of names.
-Correct.
-MATTY: To throw
someone like you
-off the case.
-Correct.
-Mm-hmm.
So it's making it
very exciting for me, because...
I think
there's something there.
The document that I have
tells a little story about...
Louis-Michel Aury
and six trusted
Native Americans.
Late at night,
they went to this well
-to stash his treasure.
-Yeah.
And supposedly, he had buried
11 caches around this well
which were ten feet apart.
So that's where, actually,
we're targeting.
And this thing said that?
GATUSSO:
Yes.
MARTY:
Said 11 treasures
ten feet apart?
-GATUSSO: Yes.
-MARTY: Okay.
GATUSSO:
You know, a lot of times
when you do a lot of research
on these pirates
and these stories,
it's a story
when you don't have
a treasure map.
But with a treasure map,
now you do have something.
-Yeah.
-GATUSSO: So we have
a very strong possibility
that nobody else
has probably looked
for this treasure.
So here's Honeymoon Island.
This is actually
the east side of the island.
And in this dense forest here
is where Aury lived.
The research leads us into
the story of a spring well.
Well, then, obviously,
looking at all the data,
we see that there are only
two spring wells in this area.
One is Wall Springs and one
is the Spanish Well at Anclote.
Well, Wall Springs,
this water in here,
you can't get a boat in.
As you can plainly see,
the sand here,
it's too shallow
and the well is actually
a quarter of a mile inland.
So there's no way you could get
heavy barrels
in and out of there.
So you kind of
eliminate that one?
JOE:
So that's eliminated.
And then we went to
the Spanish Well at Anclote.
GATUSSO:
And then,
there's three things
for the pirates normally
you have to keep an eye on,
which is markings on trees--
which at the time, the hurricane
probably knocked these trees
down so we couldn't find
any markings--
high ground,
and the landmark.
So we had the high ground,
we couldn't find the markings,
but there was also a landmark.
That adds up to a possible
location of a treasure.
-So...
-The landmark is the well.
-GATUSSO: Right.
-The Spanish Well.
-Yes.
-And then, of course,
the further research
dictated that there were
11 caches buried
in plain sight around it.
MATTY:
Amazing.
So, then what did you do?
-We GPR'd it.
-(laughter)
-What a shock.
Mm-hmm.
-MATTY: And?
-GATUSSO: That's where...
We found 11 of them.
-Really? Right where
they should be?
-Wow.
-Yes, sir.
-MATTY: Now that's interesting.
Okay, I have to ask.
I have to ask.
How much money could this be?
What's it worth?
-In today's money?
-Yeah.
Approximately $140 million.
MARTY:-JOE: Ahh!
That's worth a look, huh, Matty?
I heard that.
I'll dig a hole
for that potential.
NARRATOR: In Tampa,
Florida, Marty Lagina
and Matty Blake are preparing
to join treasure hunter
Joe Zsiga in his quest
to find a buried treasure
believed to be connected
to the early 19th-century
French privateer, Louis Aury.
What does this
Spanish Well look like?
What... Is it,
is it a deep well?
Is it a big well?
Do you bail the water out of it?
It's...
In 1948, a young child
-fell in that well.
-Oh, okay.
So they cemented it up
and they, you know,
rebarred it and whatever,
so no further children
could have any dangers
of falling in it.
So now it's covered over
and just got lost in time.
-MARTY: It's in sand, no?
-It's in sand.
This is a county park, correct?
JOE:
Yes, it's a county park.
MARTY:
Because you got stymied
initially from--
Initially, yes.
I've applied permit after permit
and the same person
that works there
-turns me down.
-MARTY: Right.
-But they wanted
an archaeologist.
-JOE: Yes.
Well, enter Doctor Taylor
here and, uh,
are you up to speed?
I'm becoming more
and more up to speed.
Um, you know, I'm generally
a skeptical person.
MARTY: Mm-hmm.
-And I get contacted
fairly frequently
about possible treasure.
-Of course.
-And, um,
usually it doesn't get past
the rumor stage, you know?
Someone has an old story
that's been passed down,
and, um, you know,
I thank you for contacting me,
but I'll pass.
When Marty contacted me
with this story,
and I got a chance to speak
with Captain Joe here,
it was more than a rumor.
He had done archival research,
they had brought in GPR
that showed anomalies.
And having the state involved,
the State of Florida involved
and a permit in place,
I was, you know,
more-more than compelled
and happy to join the team.
With him coming on board,
-you've got your permits.
-Yes, we do. Yes, we do.
Yeah.
I spoke to the Florida
State officials,
um, and we've discussed
what needs to be done.
With treasure hunting,
any time you go into the ground,
you destroy the site,
essentially.
And Captain Joe
and Mike's research
showed that First Nations
were helping
Captain Aury at that time,
so a really important point is,
if you hit
a First Nations artifact,
-you really have to stop.
-Mm-hmm.
And contact government
officials in Florida
to see how they want to proceed.
All right.
Awesome.
MARTY:
Okay, so we want to dig,
but first we're
going to reverify
-these positions, correct?
-Yes.
You know, the enthusiasm
is pretty palpable here.
Are we all set with
equipment and such?
-We brought everything we need.
-MARTY: Okay.
-Good.
-JOE: I have people
there right now
prepping for us.
So they'll be all ready
to accept us when we get there.
Well, we're burning daylight.
Let's go find the old well.
-AARON: Let's go.
-I agree.
MATTY:
Let's find some gold.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR:
Later that afternoon...
-MARTY: All right guys,
this looks like it.
-MATTY: All right.
NARRATOR:
...Marty and Matty,
along with Joe
and the rest of their team,
have traveled some 30 miles
northwest of Tampa
to Anclote River Park
in Holiday, Florida.
-Hey, guys.
-MARTY: Howdy.
Let me introduce you
to everybody.
-I'm Marty.
-I'm Erin.
NARRATOR:
There they are joined
by metal detection experts
Chris Liebert and Erin Melcher.
-You guys know how to dig?
-Eh.
-We've done it once or twice.
-MARTY: (laughs) Good.
-Good.
-JOE: Well, if you're
ready to dig,
-we're going that way.
-ERIN: Let's go. Let's go.
NARRATOR:
In order to confirm
the locations
of the 11 possible treasure
caches that Mike and Joe
previously detected
in this area, they will
first need to identify
the site of the buried
Spanish Well.
Once that is accomplished,
Mike will then scan
for the most shallow
and reachable targets
using the Nokta Makro ground
penetrating radar device.
By emitting magnetic
pulses into the ground,
the unit is able to identify
possible buried
structures or objects.
However, the Nokta Makro
has capabilities
that make it ideal
for treasure hunting.
GATUSSO:
The GPR actually gives me depth,
it gives me the type of metal
and how valuable it is,
whether it's gold
or any different types
of metals as well.
I think what we want to do first
is we want to start out
right in the center.
Let's see if--
that we can locate
the actual position of the well.
And then, we can go
on a circumference
-of what the clues were
in a circle.
-MARTY: Yes.
-MATTY: Great.
-So I think we start
right in this area
-right here, guys.
-MARTY: Yeah,
let's find the well.
MATTY:
The first thing that
this team wants to do
is identify the well,
because according
to Joe's research,
the treasure caches
were laid out around
wherever this well was,
historically.
So if we can find
the well right now,
we can start measuring out
and try to find these hits.
Like, right here,
I'm actually getting
a signal right here.
MATTY:
All right, let's spike it.
Nope, still soft.
There we go.
Yeah, it dropped.
So if it's any deeper
than that, it's not there.
GATUSSO:
Here, Matty,
it was over here more.
-MATTY: Okay.
-GATUSSO: Try over here.
MATTY:
Copy that. Oh!
-JOE: Ahh!
-ERIN: There it is.
-Do we have a well?
-JOE: I think we have
a well, gentlemen.
I think we have a well.
MATTY:
That's shallow, you can just...
JOE:
All right, well,
it would make sense,
because they cemented it up
and rebarred it up.
Just finding that well
in itself is huge, because
it does show us that
our previous locations
were pretty much
right on the spot.
-MATTY: Excellent.
-GATUSSO: That's a great find.
-JOE: That's a great find.
-MATTY: Good job, fellas.
Just find the edge
of it and then...
AARON:
Yeah, that's what I'm just...
just-just find the edge.
So this gives you kind of,
like, the center of the wheel
to look for your targets,
-as like spokes off...
-Where our targets are
in appropriation to the well.
GATUSSO:
Well, we have a starting point.
-JOE: Yes, we do.
-MATTY: Excellent.
MARTY:
The first thing we do
is find the cement cap
over the old well.
That helps refine the search.
That helps to add
further credence
to the treasure deposits.
GATUSSO:
What I'd really like
to do is, um,
probably draw, like,
a line 15 feet around that.
-Give me a better idea
of a radius.
-Yeah, okay, we can do that.
18 is what I calculated it to,
if you want.
GATUSSO:
That's even better,
we can do that.
MARTY:
So my thought is,
"Hey, if we know
"exactly where this well is now,
let's reverify
these positions."
Because if they are
in a circle,
they will be
at the same distance.
So I just kind of did
some mental arithmetic
and figured the radius
would be about 18 feet
to allow 10-foot spacing along
the circumference of a circle.
MATTY:
It's a huge circle.
GATUSSO:
So, I'm just gonna
comb this whole thing.
Seems to be pulling
a lot of iron.
-MATTY: It's reading iron?
-GATUSSO: Yeah.
-(GPR beeping)
-Oh, right here.
MATTY:
Oh... Oh.
-Oh, I like that.
-MARTY: Yeah, that sounds good.
-MATTY: That's the best
sound we've heard.
-JOE: Wow, look at that.
-GATUSSO: The biggest one
I've seen.
-JOE: Get a look at that.
-What's it saying?
-JOE: Get a look at this.
MATTY:
Oh, my goodness.
Is that the biggest spike
you've seen?
-JOE: Yeah, right now, yeah.
-MATTY: All right.
-Then that's a prime candidate.
-GATUSSO: Yeah, let me scan it
-one more time
just to make sure.
-Yeah, sure.
-(GPR beeping)
-MATTY: About the size
of a chest, maybe, Marty?
MARTY:
One can hope.
GATUSSO:
I don't know if you can
see it in red right there.
MATTY:
What is that red?
-GATUSSO: Gold.
-MATTY: That's gold?
It says gold with
an exclamation point.
Well, I mean now we have to dig.
MARTY:
So Mike's got some sort of
combination GPR/metal detector.
The metal detection portion
of his instrument is saying
that there's a certain
likelihood percentage that
what he's detecting is gold.
GATUSSO:
The depth is approximately
five to seven feet.
-Okay.
-JOE: That's pretty deep.
GATUSSO:
I mean, that's what it--
I mean, it's five
to seven feet right here,
right where I have this thing.
And we can dig how much?
AARON:
The regulations are,
for every meter down,
you have to go...
Uh, one down...
So if you go down two,
you got to go out two.
Okay, fair enough.
Shall we begin?
-MARTY: Yes.
-Let's break ground.
Here we go, guys.
Captain?
-JOE: Yes?
-It's official now, my friend.
So, we know there's
about a foot of backfill.
We'll do a two-meter
by two-meter
and see what that anomaly is.
MATTY:
This is a different type
of treasure hunt.
There's a huge archaeological
component to this,
and that's why
Dr. Aaron Taylor is here
we're able to do this.
So we have to do this
very judiciously.
I'm just gonna work this edge.
...follow exactly what
Dr. Taylor tells us to do
and how to do it.
We're not just digging
a hole in the ground,
frantically searching
for treasure here,
or we'll get stopped.
So we can see
a definite color change.
-MATTY: Yeah.
-That we're getting rid of
that white, gray backfill,
and the orange is
probably the natural soil.
MATTY:
Yeah, I see that color.
So once we get
all the gray stuff out,
then we'll start
sifting the orange stuff.
MATTY:
Got it. Okay.
Oh, can I get a root help?
-ERIN: Yeah.
-MATTY: See that one?
MARTY:
We knew we were
gonna run into roots,
but we ran into a lot of roots.
And the digging
is easy in the sense
that it's sand,
but really difficult
in the sense that
there are a lot of roots.
AARON:
Let's give it a little scan.
(GPR beeps intermittently)
-(steady beeping)
-GATUSSO: It's still there.
AARON:
All right,
so let's start
filling the buckets.
So in archaeology,
everything has to be screened
and that way, we get all
the artifacts, large or small.
GATUSSO:
Guys, you're gonna have to
lower that. This thing's heavy.
AARON:
All right, ready?
You shake all the dirt out
and you're left with
usually a lot of roots,
but in amongst the roots
you find the artifacts.
Every artifact,
no matter how big or small,
has a potential of
telling a big historical story.
-JOE: Let me go down in there.
-MATTY: Yes, sir.
JOE:
Faint hit right there.
-MATTY: All right, that's good.
-JOE: It's ringing.
MATTY:
We're getting deeper right now.
The work is hard.
It's hot.
But we're still getting a hit.
'Cause every time we check it,
we get another hit.
So why would we stop now?
I don't-I don't care
how deep this thing is.
I'll dig all night.
Want to switch, Mart?
-JOE: Hey, Matty?
-MATTY: Yes, sir?
Just for the hell of it,
try this auger.
Try that.
See if it works better
than the shovel.
If not, we'll go back
to the shovel.
You just keep twisting it.
Good for that.
Now, wait a minute.
MATTY:
Ah...
-ERIN: Yeah, we're in water.
-MARTY: Yep.
-JOE: We definitely hit water.
-MATTY: Damn it.
So we're digging,
trying to get that two feet,
we know we're close
and I hear this noise...
(imitates squelch)
...and the hole is just
filling up with water.
JOE:
Well, we definitely hit water.
(quietly):
It's under there, Marty.
AARON:
In archaeology,
when you hit water,
you really have to stop.
You can't excavate
through water.
With every scoopful going down,
I could see the sand
getting wetter and wetter.
GATUSSO:
Would you like me to rescan it
-just to see where we're at?
-JOE: Yeah.
And we're gonna put Michael
back in there for a scan.
Okay.
(beeping)
-MATTY: You getting
that red circle again?
-GATUSSO: Yeah.
MATTY:
That's good.
We were still
getting the reading
and then it becomes,
what do we do now?
JOE:
I'm thinking,
this hole, in my opinion,
it's that way.
It's under that tree.
We can go next to it,
but we can't go under.
-(chuckles)
-ERIN: Yeah.
JOE:
I would put even money
that it's under
the bulb of that tree.
Probably...
another foot or so
better, better that way.
Because you were, Mike,
you were getting
a reading of another four feet?
-Right.
-AARON: I don't know
if we can get four feet
under this tree.
-ERIN: No,
not without hurting it.
-No, we can't.
I'll you tell you that.
Not without that tree
being damaged or...
falling down.
You don't think
it's deeper here?
No, I think it's that way.
MARTY:
Okay, well,
today something
new happened, right?
You knew approximately
where the well was.
-Now you know
exactly where it is.
-GATUSSO: Yeah, absolutely.
MARTY: We got one more day,
and I guess I want to ask you,
what do you think?
Are we still in the right place?
I-I feel that we are
absolutely in the right place.
Something probably
is down there,
but it's just where
we can't get to it.
And, obviously, this is
the first, the first hole.
MARTY:
Yeah, and there's supposed
to be ten more of these
-if it's here, right?
-Correct.
We'll hit the best one tomorrow.
MARTY:
You can't be
in this business without
constantly having hope rise up
and wanting for today
to be the day.
Today is always the day
when you're treasure hunting.
So, am I hopeful again?
Yeah.
Nothing has been totally
disproven about the legend.
There are at least
ten other places to look
if the research
and the legend is true.
So find me the next best spot
and we'll dig tomorrow.
I can tell everyone's tired
and a little hurt
and a little frustrated,
but you haven't been wrong.
Everything you have here
says there's gold,
but it's just under
that dang tree.
Let's just pick a favorite
tomorrow and let's do it again.
JOE:
Being a foot away from
a possible hundred-plus
million dollar find
is just indescribable.
You're so close, yet you might
as well be a hundred miles away.
I could smell it,
I could taste it,
but I can't touch it.
Tomorrow is a new day.
Tomorrow is the day.
Absolutely.
Tomorrow's the day.
-MARTY: To your jobs, everybody.
-MATTY: Thanks, guys.
MARTY:
We're still in the hunt, guys.
-We're still in the hunt.
-ERIN: Absolutely.
It's not over.
MARTY:
So, Matty Blake,
what's the one word
that drives success
in just about anything?
Uh, one that comes to mind
right away is persistence.
God, mine was perseverance.
-Yeah.
-(laughs) All right.
MARTY:
You know what?
-That is awfully close.
-MATTY: Yes.
We dug hard yesterday,
and we hit a target
and couldn't get to it.
-Mm-hmm.
-MATTY: So we still have
ten chances,
and that excites me, you know?
MARTY:
Absolutely.
That's why there's
shovels in the back.
(Matty chuckles)
NARRATOR:
As a new day begins
in Holiday, Florida,
Matty Blake and Marty Lagina
arrive back at the site
of the old Spanish Well
at Anclote River Park
to join Joe Zsiga
and his team.
-JOE: Good morning, guys.
-MATTY: Good morning, Captain.
They are searching for
approximately $140 million
in gold that the French
privateer Louis Aury
and his Indigenous allies
are believed to have
divided up and buried
in 11 different treasure
caches two centuries ago.
-GATUSSO: We got some
information for you.
-(chuckling): Good.
So let me show you
what we came up with.
NARRATOR:
Earlier this morning,
researcher Michael Gattuso
conducted another
GPR survey of the area
in order to identify
the most shallow
and potentially
reachable targets.
We rescanned these,
and if you can see,
when we went around
the 18-foot circle,
we actually had
strong possibilities.
One there, one here, one there,
so within ten feet.
But the only problem is
they're ten feet deep.
All of them?
Well, not all of them.
We hit one
that's five to six feet.
-MARTY: Here?
-Right here.
MATTY:
Yeah, it fits right
in that perimeter
we kind of created
based on your math, Marty.
It's right on the line.
Is it a coincidence
that these things
were ten feet apart,
right on the 18-foot line?
-You know what I mean?
-That's the thing.
-JOE: All right, let's do it.
-Another day of digging.
All right, guys.
Let's hit it.
Let's do this.
♪ ♪
-You guys can start
hammering away.
-MATTY: All right.
JOE:
Today is a big day.
We feel confident that we have
the next right spot
that's the most viable place
to search and dig.
JOE:
Okay, come on, Erin.
Find me something good here.
I'm trying, I'm trying.
JOE:
This is the target we want.
The excitement level
is over the top.
♪ ♪
ERIN:
Oh, what is that?
JOE:
Wow, what do you got there?
I mean, it's badly rusted,
but it is a nail.
It's a clinched nail.
So it means they would have
pounded it through
-and then bent it.
-ERIN: And then bent it over.
So that it wouldn't
come back out.
-Oh, to seal something,
to hold it in.
-Yeah.
I would guess it's
a handwrought nail.
JOE:
What would you estimate
the age of that?
Late 1700s. 1790s.
Yes!
I need 1817 era, so...
Now, the problem is
it's in the backfill,
so we've lost the context.
We don't know
where the fill came from.
MATTY:
That's the thing.
ERIN: It could have been out
there and then dredged--
-Yeah.
-And dumped here.
-ERIN: Exactly.
-Yeah.
So that predates 1790.
AARON:
We need to take it
back to the lab,
clean it up the best we can.
-But it's in the backfill.
-MATTY: It's in the backfill,
understood.
but yet, if there were pirates
skulking around here
doing things,
this would put it
in the time period, so--
Yeah, and where did
this backfill come from?
-Where did the backfill
come from?
-JOE: Yeah.
MATTY:
If Aury was here,
which we believe he was
from the history
that tells us he was,
this fits that timeline.
That's good.
-GATUSSO: Heck, want me to scan
real quick?
-MATTY: Yeah.
(steady beeping)
-MATTY: Yeah, you keep
hitting that spot.
-JOE: There's your hit, man.
It's right there.
GATUSSO:
Non-ferrous is showing up.
We're still getting
those gold signature hits,
so no one wants to stop.
We're tired.
Our hands are blistered.
Our backs hurt.
None of us are spring chickens--
I'll speak for myself--
but we ain't stopping.
As long as those hits keep
coming, we ain't stopping.
The non-ferrous is right here.
-AARON: So we'll just
hammer away.
-MARTY: Okay.
Get rid of this
and then the exciting stuff
happens in the orange.
MATTY:
All right.
That put some pep in our dig.
♪ ♪
Oh, look at that, Doc.
ERIN:
There's orange.
MATTY:
We got change in color.
MARTY:
We get through this
sort of white-looking stuff,
which is the surface here.
Beach sand.
We get into a very
different-colored strata,
it's orangish colored.
-MATTY: Is that orange enough?
-AARON: Yep.
MARTY:
This is the area where now
Dr. Taylor says we have to sift
the sand to look for artifacts.
JOE:
Coming at you.
ERIN:
What we got?
Whoa.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
-CHRIS: Wow.
-ERIN: I don't know
what that is.
Hey, you guys got something?
ERIN:
That doesn't
look naturally made.
It's like the bottom
of a pot or something?
MATTY:
Got something?
AARON:
It's a chert.
It's something
First Nations would have used.
Because you can make it
razor-sharp.
-May I see that?
-Yeah.
MARTY:
Chert would be the go-to
rock for arrowheads
and scraping tools.
And Dr. Taylor is pretty sure
this is Native American stuff.
NARRATOR:
Discovering a piece of chert
more than two feet deep
has both potentially positive
and negative implications
on the operation.
Because Louis Aury is
believed to have been helped
by Indigenous people
when he buried his treasure,
it offers evidence
that they were indeed
digging in the right place.
However, the find
could also qualify the area
as a historically
protected site
and put their entire search
in legal jeopardy.
Hello.
JOE:
Upon discovering these items,
we had to have Dr. Aaron Taylor
call the Tampa History Center
and get instructions
as how to proceed,
because our dig has now changed.
How much did it change
on the pendulum?
We don't know.
It now goes in their hands.
AARON:
So we're down at the site
and now we've just found chert,
which the First Nations
liked to use to make tools.
I'm just looking for
some direction on how
you'd like me to proceed.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR: After discovering an
Indigenous artifact on the beach
where treasure hunter
Joe Zsiga believes
the 19th-century
French privateer Louis Aury
buried more than
$100 million in treasure,
archaeologist Dr. Aaron Taylor
is speaking with
local authorities to seek
permission for the team
to continue their excavation.
(indistinct voice on phone)
Mm-hmm.
JOE:
In the back of my mind I know,
"Boys, this could be
the end of a short day here.
We-we might all be going home."
Yeah.
Okay.
Bye-bye.
Onward ho!
Let's go
Good job, Doc.
ERIN:
That is awesome.
AARON:
The government official,
he said that we should
just continue.
They were happy
with the methodology
that we were using.
So, you know, it was
a big relief from everyone.
-Hey, Erin, will
you check the hole?
-ERIN: All right.
JOE: Because if we get something
out of that, even faint,
we know that we're
on the right track.
NARRATOR:
The Whites Beach Hunter ID
metal detection device
that Erin Melcher
is using can identify
not only different
types of precious metals
as much as two feet
below ground,
but is also equipped
to distinguish between
specific kinds of objects.
-(GPR beeps)
-ERIN: I'm picking it up.
-So it's probably two feet down.
-MATTY: Ah.
ERIN:
If I had to take a guess.
AARON:
Erin's instrument will
only go down to two feet,
so when Erin went down into
the pit and he got a detection,
we knew that we were
within two feet
of whatever it is
that is down there.
JOE:
Do you think there's
something valuable there?
I think there is
something valuable there.
AARON:
If you think about two feet,
it is so close
you can almost smell it.
Does it give you any sort of
indication of what it could be?
-Yeah, it tells me
on here it's coins.
-(GPR beeping)
Come on.
-Yeah, let's dig.
-(chuckling): Let's dig.
All right.
All right, back in the hole.
Back in the hole, Luke.
Whatever this signal is,
whatever this anomaly is,
it repeats.
Every time he goes
into the hole,
he gets it again.
That is significant,
so we keep going.
♪ ♪
Oh.
-AARON: Ooh, we got a nail.
-MATTY: Another one.
Another one, what?
-MATTY: Old nail.
-JOE: Yeah?
-AARON: Yeah.
-JOE: Intact?
-AARON: She's old.
-MATTY: She's old.
She's old.
This is interesting
just because of the depth
we've located this at.
-Oh, yeah.
-AARON: So...
handwrought nail,
clinched at the end.
We're looking pre-1790s.
JOE:
So, guess what?
There were people here.
-There were people here.
-Right on this spot.
-That didn't fall in.
-AARON: No.
No, that didn't.
AARON:
So let's keep digging.
-MATTY: All right.
-Let's keep digging.
♪ ♪
Is that getting more wet?
MARTY:
We continue on,
but then I dig down in this area
where we keep getting these hits
and get that hateful
squishy sound.
We get into the water.
Why don't we use
the detector again?
What I'm going to do.
I'm gonna hit it on that bucket.
-ERIN: All right.
-JOE: All right.
-You hearing anything again?
-Faint. Real faint.
-It's there.
-Okay.
-Let's, let's just
keep digging.
-All right.
GATUSSO:
So, we're about
five to six feet down
and we're starting to see
a little bit of water,
but we're still running
our metal detectors
and the GPR and
we're still getting signal,
so I know there's definitely
still something down there.
We just haven't reached it yet.
Hey, guys,
we got a signal,
we still got hope here.
Don't be giving up yet.
JOE:
It was going off
right over that hole, Marty.
Literally, nowhere else
but on-on right there
is where it was going off.
MATTY:
Wow.
-Okay, we're in soup now, yeah.
-JOE: Okay.
MATTY:
All right, it's starting to
kind of fill in on itself, so...
Is it a couple more feet down
in the darn water?
ERIN:
Well, that-- logistically--
is a problem.
Yes, it is.
AARON:
So...
...in archaeology,
we have to stop
when we hit water.
(groans)
AARON:
I just, I don't see another--
anything else
that we can really do.
MATTY:
Well, you know what,
I mean, look,
you did all the research,
you took your shot
and we found some really
interesting items here.
We did find some really
interesting artifacts.
First Nations material culture,
stones, possibly tools.
We found handmade
wrought iron nails,
which are early.
So, obviously, there was
contact between the Europeans,
the Spanish
and the First Nations
who were living here.
Today we found, you know,
that contact period.
-That's exciting.
-That is.
-Yeah.
MARTY:
This was something
that was worth doing
and it was worth doing right,
and we did do it right.
What we found
were historical artifacts
that are probably
going to advance the ball,
the knowledge of
the history of Florida.
I think it was,
in that sense, a success.
You still believe
the treasure is here?
-Yes, I do.
-You do?
JOE:
Yes, I do.
There's just too much
out there that points to it.
-Yeah.
-MARTY: Well, we know
-how hard it is
to retrieve. (laughs)
-MATTY: Yeah.
If we were allowed to have
a small backhoe in there,
we would've got to that cache.
I don't think this is
the end of Captain Joe Zsiga.
This is only the beginning.
It will continue on.
The treasure hunting
is not done.
-It's only just begun.
-JOE: Beginning.
MARTY:
All right.
Amen. Amen.
Let's fill the hole.
GATUSSO:
You guys did a great job, man.
♪ ♪
MATTY: I don't know
about you, Marty,
but I'm still a little sore
from the Captain Aury dig.
Uh, my hands are
still blistered, it was--
We put in some
actually hard work.
It was all hand digging.
-Hand digging.
-MARTY: Yeah.
-And you know...
-How come I didn't go? (laughs)
Yeah, that's a damn
good question, I'd say.
We'll take you next time.
So, have you been in touch
with Captain Joe?
Absolutely, Captain Joe
has been working
around these issues
and he emailed me
and said he had an update.
-So he's standing by
if you want to talk to him.
-MARTY: I'd love to hear.
-I'd love to hear what happened.
-I'd love an introduction.
-Yes.
-Great.
-There he is.
-Hey, Captain Joe.
-Captain!
-Hello, sir.
How is everybody?
We're great, how are you?
Oh, we're good.
I really can't complain.
Good.
Hey, we got big brother
here this time.
-Rick, say hello to Captain Joe.
-Hello, Captain Joe.
I've heard nothing
but good things about you.
Oh, they lie, but that's good.
(all laughing)
MARTY:
I-I mean, I'm keen to know,
I'm just gonna guess,
Captain Joe,
that you didn't give up
and throw in the towel
after we left, correct?
JOE:
No.
I've got a really good update
and I think it's just what
I need to solve this mystery.
♪ ♪
MATTY: So, Captain Joe,
what is your update?
Since Marty and I have left,
what've you been doing?
Well, I'm working
with Dr. Aaron Taylor
to get the proper permitting,
what we need to get
heavy equipment in there
so that we can get, you know,
as deep as what we'd like to.
Yeah, that would've made
an enormous difference
when we were there.
That's great.
Are they working with you?
Yeah, they are.
Thanks to the good doctor.
-That's great.
-Awesome.
You know, I'm glad we could help
-by the introduction.
-MATTY: Yeah.
Captain, I have a question
for you, following up,
but I don't know if you know
the answer to this yet.
Speaking of
Dr. Aaron Taylor, too,
he used the phrase
"potential first contact site,"
um, with-- given some of
the Native American artifacts
we may have found.
Has there been any follow-up
to that, and did that
increase the interest--
hopefully not scrutiny
but interest-- with you
and the State in terms of
being able to explore the space?
Yes, I found a couple more
first contact items.
Uh,
I also found part of a weapon,
uh, I found a gold earring.
Wow.
Geez.
Yeah, there was a number
of items that we found
-right near that dig site.
-MATTY: I love it.
You know, at the very least
this could be one
of those situations, too,
where you're
looking for treasure--
as you guys have done--
and find another piece of
history like this well site
can become something that
Florida did not know before.
This is a definite, proven
first contact site,
and that's really exciting.
Well, keep in mind that
Pasco County, as well,
did not know where that
well was until we found it
-that day.
-Bingo.
They thought it was
in the middle of that river.
That's just opened up
a whole new thing
for the county now that,
you know, it gives me
more of an edge to continue
to do what I want to do
and have them back me.
-That's great.
-MARTY: Did you repeat
any scans with
different equipment,
you know, to go
around the circle?
You know, 'cause of
the 11 different spots?
Not as yet.
I am presently working
with a company out of Tampa.
With all due respect,
the team you've put together
is excellent and they are great,
but in my opinion,
here on Oak Island you have
the greatest detector
in the world, Gary Drayton,
and he happens to live
-in Florida.
-That's true.
I would love you to get
Gary Drayton on that site
and rescan those 11 spots.
Um, I just...
that's just my opinion.
-That would be good.
-I think he could really
identify things
for you in that way.
You get me his number,
you guys have
my emails and my info,
and I promise you
this day, that will happen.
-(laughing)
-Awesome, Captain.
You still got the fire
in the belly, don't you?
For this whole thing?
Well, we won't give up.
I mean, it's here.
I was close.
I was as close
as you could possibly get.
My problem is,
the water got the best of me.
-I love it.
-Another Oak Island similarity.
-Yep.
-MATTY: Yes.
I want to thank you
for the information,
but I heard one key phrase
here today
and you reiterated it,
"I'm not giving up."
Absolutely not.
You can take that to the bank.
-(laughing)
-There you go.
No, we hope you
take it to the bank.
MATTY:
Literally and figuratively.
All right, Captain Joe,
thank you.
-We'll talk soon.
-Okay, bye-bye. Thanks, guys.
-Bye-bye.
MATTY:
Phew.
Well, that
is a determined captain.
Well, I-I-I, look,
it's very interesting,
you know, a fellow like that
who is accomplished
in several areas,
now turns himself
to try to understand
not only the historical
narrative of the area
but fascinated with a story
that culminates with perhaps
a retrievable treasure.
Perfect melding of concepts,
ideas and passions, right?
There you go.
-I love it.
-Well.
Why don't we meld
your passions together
and go find your treasure,
how about that?
-It would be time, wouldn't it?
-Off we go.
-And I need a masseuse
from all that digging.
-(chuckling)
-We have one on the island?
-Yeah, another shovel.
-(Matty laughing)
-MARTY: Yeah,
hair of the dog, Matty.
-MATTY: Yeah, right,
more digging?
-MARTY: Yes.
CAPTIONING PROVIDED BY
A+E NETWORKS